SFAM 1105

Obstacle Takeoff and Approach
Takeoff: This maneuver is performed from an LZ where the egress path is obstructed. The procedure is required when there is some factor (gross weight, density altitude, or obstacle height) that prevents the pilot from lifting into a hover to clear the obstacles.
N: This procedure may cause the aircraft to enter flight into the avoid region of the height-velocity diagram.
Procedure:
a. Before lifting off, note the egress path and imagine a line from the helicopter to the highest/nearest obstacle. This is the departure path.
b. Lift into a stable hover. The PNAC will check to ensure the engines are producing the expected amount of torque.
c. Smoothly coordinate collective and cyclic (increase power and lower the nose - not to exceed 5 degrees nose down) to transition to forward flight along the expected departure path.
Common errors: Climbing straight up until above the obstacle before attempting to transition to forward flight. 
Approach: The obstacle in the ingress path will dictate the type of approach glide slope. The precision obstacle / CAL approach is a relatively steep angle (20-30 degree) approach used for obstacle clearance and power management. The precision obstacle/confined area approach is easily adaptable to the CH-53 landing pattern from Figure 1-2, however, the terminal approach profile is adjusted for a slower and steeper descent. reference Figure 1-4 for the Precision obstacle / Confined Area approach profile. It is important to note that this profile falls exclusively within the avoid areas of both single and dual engine failure H-V diagram.
Procedure:
a. Upon reaching the abeam position at 300' AGL and 80 KIAS, turn toward the 90 position and coordinate cyclic and collective inputs to begin decelerating while maintaining altitude. 
b. Adjust the cyclic and collective to arrive at the 90 at 60 KIAS and 300' AGL. Continue to decelerate in the turn and intercept the final approach path at 300' AGL and 45-50 knots groundspeed.
c. The PNAC should do a final gear check and ensure all 3 engines are operating properly.
d. From the top of the glide slope of whichever approach path is chosen. (20-30 degrees), note the intended point of landing and create a visual line to it. This is the approach glide slope; note the obstacle clearance it provides.
e. Upon intercepting the glide slope, reduce collective to initiate a descent and maintain a nose-up attitude to continually decelerate in the descent. Adjust collective and cyclic as necessary to maintain a controlled rate of descent and deceleration. the purpose of a controlled, constant-rate is to eliminate the need for a large correction at the bottom of the approach, in case of either limited power available or a dusty landing environment.
f. As airspeed slows below 40 KIAS, transition to ground speed references (e.g. relative to an easily distinguishable obstacle. As the nose of the aircraft enters the LZ, the PAC shall announce, "Nose in the zone" to the crew. The crew chief will observe the tail rotor clearance and announce "Tail Clear" when reasonably assured that the current flight path will not result in a tail strike with any obstacles.
g. At approximately 30' AGL (clear of all obstacles), assume the landing attitude (6-8 degrees nose up) and transition to a hove or no-hover landing.
C: Slow airspeed coupled with a high descent rate can introduce vortex ring state. Maintain decent rates below 700fpm.
C: Do not descend below the height of the obstacle(s) until the crew chief clears the tail.
C: It is important to note that this profile falls exclusively within the avoid areas of both single and dual engine failure H-V diagrams.
Approximate checkpoints:
- 125' 25KTS (Trim 6-8 degrees nose up wings level)
- 100' 20 KTS
- 75' 15 KTS
- 50' 10 KTS
- 25' 5 KTS

Smoke and fume elimination
Pilot:
1. Vent fan - On
2. Registers and diffusers - Open.
Crewman
1. Cabin diffusers - Open.
2. Upper half of personnel door - Open.
3. Emergency escape hatch (gunner window) - Open.
4. Cargo ramp door - Open.
C: Do not push out cabin windows or escape hatches while helicopter is in flight, as they may damage helicopter. 

AFCS computer malfunctions/mode failures
-A malfunction in the AFCS computer can cause low to high random inputs into the main rotor or tail rotor controls, possibly resulting in helicopter vibration. 
-The CMPTR POWER pushbutton on th eAFCS CONTROL panel should be turned off if the following happens.
1. An increase in aircraft motion, vibration, or tip path plane movement accompanied by the AFCS DEGRADED advisory light and all FAIL ADVISORY lights except DESEN and SAS indicates a single computer (SIMPLEX) failure and the AFCS is only partially functional. If this happens, secure trim and AFCS, then recycle computer power. 
2. An incrase in aircraft motion, vibration, or tip path plane movement accompanied by the AFCS CAUTION light indicates a dual-computer (DUPLEX) failure and no AFCS functions are available. If this happens, recycle computer OFF then ON.
-An AFCS caution light means both computers are off and no AFCS functions are being performed. If recycling computer power OFF and then ON does not make the AFCS caution light go out, do the following:
*1. IMC - Land as soon as possible.
2. VMC - Land as soon as practical.
-Desensitizer failure
-Any of the following conditions may indicate an inoperative desensitizer:
1. DSEN fail advisory light on the AFCS control panel is lit.
2. AFCS is off.
3. AFCS duplex failure.
4. FAS shearpin is sheared.
W: Loss of a control desensitizer will, under certain circumstances, allow the pilot to interact with the fuselage bending modes to create a pilot-induced oscillation. This interaction can result in divergent helicopter oscillations. Delayed pilot response in eliminating these oscillations may result in helicopter damage and/or uncontrolled flight. If this happens, releasing the flight controls for several seconds should eliminate the condition. During external cargo operations, if PIO/PAO happens and cannot be controlled, immediately jettison the load. 
If a desensitizer failure happens, do the following:
1. MODE RESET pushbutton - Reset.
If the desensitizer failure does not clear after the mode reset, the following precautions must be taken: 
1. Avoid abrupt control inputs.
2. Minimize hover time.
3. Do not pickup an external load. If flying with an external load, continue to the destination and gently set the load down. Do not attempt to relift the load. 
-AFCS Malfunction
-An automatic flight control system malfunction could happen as a result of a stability augmentation system (inner loop, SAS) failure, autopilot (outer loop, trim) failur,e or an AFCS servo hardover. The cues are distinctly different for each failure mode. An inner loop failure will be noted by an unusual uncommanded attitude change with no associated movement in the flight controls. Due to the limited authority (about 10 percent) of the inner loop functions of the AFCS, this failure mode is generally benign and easily controlled by the pilot. An autopilot failure, on the other hand, is characterized by an uncommanded movement of the flight control. The rate of movement of the flight control is limited to 10 percent per second, which gives the pilot adequate time to control the autopilot failure (trim drive). Recovery is made by pressing the trim release of the flight control in question and manually repositioning the control. 

AFCS Servo Hardover
-An AFCS servo hardover is an uncommanded movement of the flight controls which cannot be easily overridden by the pilot. The rate at which the control moves may vary from a relatively slow rate (about 1 inch per second) to full travel in less than one second (100 percent per second). When potentially high rates of control change are experienced, and pressing the trim release does not override the drive, suspect an AFCS servo hardover. A rapid response to this emergency will be required to retain control. If a hardover is experienced, do the following:
*1. Transfer to other AFCS servo.
C: High control forces may change to normal at AFCS servo changeover.
*2. If servo hardover condition continues - Secure AFCS servos. 
*3. If IMC - Land as soon as possible.
4. If VMC - Land as soon as practical.
5. If servo hardover condition goes away - Proceed and land as soon as practical.

BIM/Blade Pressure caution light (in-flight)
-If BIM caution light goes on, have a crewmember check if BIM circuit breaker is in (on right cabin circuit breaker panel). Due to the sensitivity of the system, the caution light may go on due to Electromagnetic Interference (EMI) giving the pilot a false indication of impending spar failure. If the caution light remains on with the circuit breaker in, and EMI is not verified:
*1. Airspeed - 80 KIAS, minimize maneuvering.
*2. Altitude - Minimum safe.
3. No. 3 primary AC BIM circuit breaker - Check in.
4. Land as soon as practical. Do not exceed 1.5 flight hours unless necessary to reach a safe landing site.
a. If flying with an external load that cannot be safely transported at 80 KIAS, consideration should be given to load jettison. Hover flight should be minimized.
W: Flight operations outside a level cruise flight regime of 80+/-5 KIAS and operations in a hover produce blade flight loads that will increase potential crack stresses and accelerate crack propogation rates. Continuous flight outside this recommended flight profile will compromise the safety margin incorporated into the maximum perscribed flight duration and lower the allotted 1.5 hour interval.

Tail rotor control system failure
-The self-centering spring installation provides the capability of continued flight to a landing site with tail rotor control system failure. At a gross weight of 46,500 pounds the helicopter flies in a right sideslip (left yaw) below 135 KIAS, trims to a balanced level flight at about 135 KIAS, and flies in a left sideslip (right yaw) at speeds above 135 KIAS. Balanced flight at gross weights above 46,500 pounds is achieved at lower airspeeds, and below 46,500 pounds at higher airspeeds.

Approach and landing with tail rotor control system failure
-If an approach and landing is to be made, airspeed can be reduced while maintaining a reasonable trimmed flight condition by slowly reducing power and entering a left turn with cyclic. Balanced flight can be manintained during power and airspeed changes by increasing or decreasing the roll angle until about 35 percent to 40 percent torque and 50 to 60 KIAS is attained. Level flight can then be maintained with a small amount of right sideslip at 35 percent to 40 percent torque and 50 to 50 KIAS. Increasing collective too rapidly or too much will cause a sideslip to the left and decreasing collective too rapidly or too much will cause a sideslip to the right. It is recommended that a roll-on landing be made on a prepared surface. If the landing has to be made to an unprepared surface, consideration should be given to a wheels-up slide-on landing. It is important during the final phase of the landing to (1) retain attitude by referencing the VGI, (2) slightly apply collective just before touchdown to provide a nonslip condition for touchdown, and (3) immediately apply wheel brakes while slowly lowering the collective. A wave-off may be made any time before a small flare is initiated for final touchdown by accelerating into forward flight. While accelerating, the helicopter will enter a left sideslip condition that will decrease as airspeed is increased. 
1. Flightpath - 180 left approach.
2. Downwind leg - 200 feet altitude and 45 to 50 KIAS.
N: Airspeed can be reduced during the turn on to final approach or when rolling out of the turn to final approach.
3. Start - APP
N: Nr above 103 percent may result in APP shutdown.
4. Final approach - 6 to 8 degree noseup attitude, and enough torque to maintain 35 to 45 KIAS and 200 to 300 FPM rate of descent. 
W: Rapid or too large incrased collective application will cuase the helicopter to sideslip to the left. Rapid or too large decreased collective application will cause the helicopter to sideslip to the right. 
5. Collective - Increase slightly to reduce sideslip and maintain all conditions to touchdown. 
6. Touchdown - Immediately apply wheel brakes and lower collective.
7. Speed control levers - Ground Idle. 

Tail rotor tandem servo malfunction
-The primary visual indications of tail rotor tandem servo malfunction are the 1 STG T/R SERVO BYPASS and 2 STG T/R SERVO BYPASS caution lights that go on when the servo has malfunctioned in such a manner to cause it to bypass hydraulic pressure or it has lost system pressure. When a tail rotor servo bypass caution light is observed, do not turn off the corresponding servo system unless there is a definite restriction of controls and perform the following:
*1. Airspeed - Reduce.
*2. Land as soon as possible. 

Fuel filter bypass light
Three engine fuel filters being bypassed:
*1. Engine instruments - Monitor.
*2. Land as soon as possible.
One or two engine fuel filters being bypassed:
1. Engine instruments - Monitor.
2. Land as soon as practical. 

Hydraulic fire in main rotor pylon
-Hydraulic fire in the main rotor pylon area is most likely to occur during taxi, hover, or low airspeed operations. Hydraulic fire may be indicated by white smoke and/or flames in the vicinity of the main transmission and/or by illumination of a number of unassociated caution lights. Because of the intense heat generated, flight control components may disintegrate rapidly, causing the aircraft to become uncontrollable. If a hydraulic fire is detected/suspected:
*1. Land immediately.
N: If fesiable, accomplish a running landing at 40 knots ground speed to maintain airflow through the rotary wing pylon.
*2. Perform emergency shutdown procedure.
W: Delay in shutting down the helicopter may give the fire time to burn through a flight control component, causing the helicopter to roll over.
3. Portable fire extinguisher - Use. 

Emergency Engine Shutdown
*1. High pressure rotor brake switch - Emergency.
*2. All engine speed control levers - Shut off.
*3. APP - As required.
*4. Fuel selector levers - Shut off. 

Use of GPS system

Sender/receiver responsibilities and overcoming communication barriers
